and then I started fooling around with
this typewriter and I I thought damn I
fell for it
but I knew there was a directional
transmitter in there and I had to find
it it was a transmitter homemade
transmitter all these transistors and
batteries and antennas and things all in
notches carved out of a very thin piece
of plywood this was a murder plot it was
a plot to make me disappear and that the
fridge the spanish services were going
to do the job this was brought on by
Henry Kissinger who second Secretary of
State then made this long trip over
there I mean the secret trip over there
and forced the British to take action
against me and started a whole series of
deportations Philip Agee quit the CIA
after 12 years the CIA desperately tried
to prevent his writing of a book we'll
hear his story in the concluding hour of
our two-part series of our interview
with him right now on alternative views
phil was in the CIA for 12 years and
then quit after he saw what the CIA was
actually doing all the terrible things
doing in the areas where he was working
particularly in Ecuador Mexico and Budig
why he resigned in 1969 to write his
first big book inside the company or CIA
diary since then he's written five books
the last one being on the run which
tells about his experiences after he got
out of the CIA when he was in Europe and
trying to write his book and the CIA was
hounding him from country to country
doing everything it could to keep him
from writing this book would you mind
you I'm sure you told this story
hundreds of thousands of times and for
you to tell us your famous typewriter
story about sure I'm glad to I hope we
have enough tape for it because it's a
long story but I'll try to make it short
just the bare bones oh that's okay
that's okay we have lunch date oh all
right well what happens is this I am
just to set the scene I had left the CIA
in at the end of 1968 had turned against
the work but I hadn't any intention of
writing a book doing anything I wanted
to start a new life and among the things
I did was to reenroll in university I
stayed living in Mexico City where I'd
worked on the Olympics and I went into a
doctoral program in Latin American
Studies at the National Autonomous
University there in Mexico City is a
huge one and as I plowed through these
studies
month after month during the reading
doing the writing of the papers and so
forth I and I was studying you know the
horrors of the conquest and the genocide
of the colonial period the forced labor
and all of that the the wiping out of
entire culture and then the United
States domination in the close colonial
period
I was thinking thinking I I came to the
conclusion that what I and my colleagues
were doing was nothing more than a
continuation of all this that started at
that time nearly 500 years earlier and
that led me to think that maybe it
wouldn't be a bad idea to expose what we
were doing it had been an unthinkable
idea until then nobody ever done it and
I was pledged to secrecy but
I began to think that maybe staying
silent on all this was worse than than
doing it you know in fact I could see
some very positive things in a book and
so I began looking around Mexico City
for resources I needed to reconstruct
events to show our hand and events and I
couldn't find them in Mexico City so I I
had to choose and I chose for the book
came to Europe and spent a year in
France and I made a mistake early on I
wrote a letter to the leading Latin
American or certainly South American
political Weekly called marcha at that
time and it's published in Montevideo
and I had I had mentioned how we
intervene in elections because they had
elections coming up and I was hoping to
to aid the frente Amplio with this
letter which they did publish and I
didn't know they published it so one
night in paris it knock on the door in
my hotel and there is an old friend from
the CIA and we go out and have a few
drinks and he says well I guess you know
that I'm here for a reason and I said
well yeah I think you are what is that
and then he takes out the singing puts
on the papers a Xerox copy of my article
which was published in this mega this
newspaper or weekly in Norway marcha and
he said mr. Helms wants to know about
this because I'd mentioned in it that I
was writing a book he was a head of the
CIA he was director then and it sent
this Keith over to see me and anyway I
said don't worry I'm not going to reveal
any secrets I'm going to submit it for
review and all of that
I just want to get him off my back well
anyway I my children were visiting it
was over Christmas and New Year's of of
that year seventy one seventy two and so
I took them and in the way I was the
morning went over to the railway station
and got a ticket and we went to Spain
got out of there and then eventually
they flew back to the states to go back
to school from Madrid and I went back to
Spain to Paris but a few months later a
young American befriended me phone whose
name is Sal Ferreira and he was a
journalist or he said he was a
journalist an underground journalist who
was representing a couple of groups in
the States and he was over in Paris to
cover the peace talks then going on
between laid octo of Vietnam and Henry
Kissinger we saw each other from time to
time I was living in a virtue pot l on
the west bank just down from the
Sorbonne and on the corner there was a
cafe called Leung and he came in there
and that's where he met me I'd go down
there in the evenings for a beer or
something so I was desperate for money I
was really I didn't know how I could
continue working on my book because I
had I was running out of money I had no
money in fact to speak of just enough
for a little food every day and I was
getting desperate and I had rented a
typewriter from a typewriter shop at
Odeon and eventually I had to turn that
typewriter back in to get the deposit
back in the meantime I had taken a big
chance I had told Sal who I was and what
I was doing hoping he might do an
interview he could sell to playboy for
$10,000 and given me five you know and
so he was he was recording the all the
stuff on about the CIA and the book I
was working on it was my only hope to
get some money and he did give me money
as a matter of fact you know a little
bit here in a little bit there just to
keep me going and one time he invited me
to dinner the next week oh by the way
when I was with him I'd noticed
surveillance in the street and I was
being followed around from about
February of 1972 on and the first time
that happened that night I went on a
very late at night I checked out of the
hotel and made sure nobody was there and
took a taxi over to the area where a
friend of mine lived a woman whose name
is Katrina in the passage section of
Paris and I I asked her if I could say
in her place for a few days it turned
out to be six months or more because I
had to stay in secret and so I wouldn't
tell anybody where I was living I
wouldn't tell Sal or anybody else
anyway he invites me to dinner we go to
dinner and he says we're walking up the
hill there to to a room of Todd and he
points out this english style pub he
said let's have a beer there afterwards
they cut English beer now I said fine so
we went to dinner came back went into
the pub and there's a bar here and
there's a stool here stool here stood
him so forth and these are empty and he
sits on the one on the end I sit on the
one next to him we order our beer and in
comes this rather attractive
voluptuous young American woman a woman
let's say carrying a time magazine so he
tells you is America and so she starts
to talk to me and she is a Venezuelan
heiress I mean American but had been
raised in Venezuela and her parents had
died and left her a lot of money and she
had just spent the academic year over in
Geneva at the University of Geneva
studying French and she was going to
spend the summer in Paris so she wanted
to know what I was doing and I said well
I'm trying to write a book and she's old
a great American novel and I said not
exactly I said it's about American
foreign policy in Latin America it says
oh oh isn't that awful often I said it's
part about CIA Toshio over awful I can't
stand those people that's terrible
and so anyway we talked a little bit and
she says well look call me call me I'll
invite you to dinner and so she writes
out her telephone number and to gives it
to me so I'm thinking well what is this
gonna lead to and I I didn't call her
and I left went through my routine not
to be followed back to the little room
where I was staying and about a week
later I see Sal and to do some more of
this recording for the interview it was
notoriously slow on that when made which
made me very suspicious and he brings up
this woman he said by the way did Lesley
he she used the name Leslie Gunn
Dunnigan did Leslie did you call Leslie
and did you talk to her and see her and
I said no no I'm not interested I'm not
in stir here you take the telephone
number knew call her he said no no but
remember she's got money
she said she's an heiress and maybe you
could talk into us into into supporting
you and financing your book
I said well sell maybe maybe maybe I
should talk to her so so what I did was
I called her just oh hello how are you
he has well yeah let's have dinner come
on over and I'll take you to dinner
so she lived down in Montparnasse don't
repeat Todd I went over her place it was
this big tall modern building it went up
to the studio she had rented and so we'd
say I'm talking have a drink or
something then she takes me out to
dinner a very romantic place with red
and white checkered tablecloths and and
and and candles and everything and have
our steak frequent then we go back to
her place and we're sitting there
talking maybe having another drink of
the wine or something I guess and it was
either that time or the next time that I
decided to tell her who I was and see if
I get some money out of her so I did and
she said oh yes yes I'll do that I'll
help you I'll help you but you know I
can't stand Paris it's too boring I'll
leave you this apartment this studio
apartment for the summer you can have
the key and here's a I've forgotten how
many thousands of francs she gave me and
I'm going off to see my boyfriend in
Barcelona and we're going to Majorca for
the summer so I have the apartment I
have the money and all I needed was some
help because I had to get a clean draft
of what I had done so far ready for
Barney Russert of growth press who was
coming through Paris on the way from the
Frankfurt Book Fair back to the States
in October so there's another person who
I'd met in this craft cafe yams a
french-canadian whose name was Torres
and she was doing secretarial work up
she had raised her children in the
United States she had married an
American they were divorced she had a
son and a daughter she used to talk
about all the time and we had a lot of
political conversations she was very
very hip politically so I asked her if
she would Oh as a matter of fact I asked
somebody else first but that's another
story the woman freaked out and and and
had a nervous breakdown when I told her
who I wasn't what I was doing I ball
started rolling around
had no God had she had to go to the
American Hospital embarrassment then I
said okay less stress so so I asked her
I said sure I'll help you I'll help you
I'll come over there in the evenings um
we'll do it in the evenings after um
after I've get off work cause she's
working in a law firm over there that
time so I gave her the address and keys
and everything and I would go over and
wait for her and she'd get there about
7:30 or 8:00 and this was Leslie's
apartment and you can guess the
understory naturally Leslie was working
with the CIA the whole time and they
were recording everything to resume I
was saying in this apartment but anyway
we use the apartment she got the whole
thing done and Leslie then comes back
from Majorca in September and she and
Sal kind of team up together and they're
giving me money still she's giving me
money and then I finish what I'm doing
in Paris I'm going to go over to London
to finish because the British Museum
newspaper library this fantastic
institution has newspapers from all
times in all places and they had all the
local papers from the places where I'd
worked in the CIA from the times I was
working there and so I could go over
there and read all the newspapers that I
was reading you know when I was there
and that's what made my book by the way
because everything we did of importance
came out in the newspapers save our hand
in these events but that's jumping ahead
a little bit what happens is this
I had this borrowed typewriter from Sal
which I was using and one night Leslie
comes in in the rain to a place where we
were going to meet it was a it was a
cafe in the on the West Bank and she
comes in with this typewriter it's a
used typewriter and she said Phil the
guy who owns that typewriter that Sal
gave you his back and he needs it back
immediately but here's one that I bought
for you from a used typewriter store and
so I said Oh fine and I I had to go back
and get that other typewriter from
Katrina's room you know and bring it
back over because the guy had had so I I
didn't want to carry this one I didn't
need a typewriter I was making
recordings then for for London and these
were operational episodes maybe 40 or 50
secret operations which I was trying to
describe on tape to use over in London
and so I didn't need the type write it
in Torres's a
apartment she always left the door open
she wasn't there I just stuck it in
there to have it out of the way and then
I went back to get the other type of bra
that gave Leslie and then a few days
later we're at lunch and Leslie has
given me the money that I need to get
over to London and last for a couple of
weeks before they come over supposedly
to help me continue working on the book
and doing the research and South says
overlay says by the way Phil did how's
the typewriter that Leslie gave you
working and I said well son I haven't
used it yet I didn't need it I'm doing
recordings right now and I left it in
Torres's place well I got the money but
later on I was talking to Sal he says
Phil you know Leslie so upset about the
typewriter she had that terrible cold
and she went out in the rain and got
that typewriter for you and you know we
all know Torrez never locks her
apartment she's already having radio and
other stuff stolen from there and if the
typewriter is stolen less he's going to
be so upset and she's already so hurt
she might not continue for Nancy huh so
I took the typewriter and I took it over
to Katrina's place and it was there for
a few days before I was ready to go to
London and on a Saturday afternoon I'd
finished the tapes went out to get a
beer came back up the steps and this was
a this building was where the servants
lived - a very elegant building in the
16th or ones' bond which is the richest
area of parish and so there's a small
maid's room where Katrina and I where I
was staying with her and so I came up
the steps went down this dark dark
hallway and there in front of her door I
saw these two people a man and woman
standing at the door as if they'd just
knocked but as I approached down this
dark hallway they backed off from the
door to the other side of hall and began
to embrace and to kiss it seemed it
looked like and they had coats on it was
already I think the end of October early
November and so I stopped at her door
and knocked and she opened the door and
and she started laughing to people oh I
said wait a minute wait a minute I think
I think they're monitors or something I
think the CIA has caught me I think
they've caught me I went in close the
door and the reason I thought that was
that Katrina used to like to listen to
the radio it was a phillips table model
recorder
a thing with radio and FM and all that
and for the last days when she was
listening to it there was this beeping
sound on the radio and I thought it was
a propagation from ort F which is the
radio television Center in Paris and we
were so close there but it was a kind of
an irritating he was like beep beep beep
beep beep beep like that and as I was
standing there and these people were
embracing and I was waiting for it open
the door I was hearing the beeping Sun I
thought my god that sound we hadn't even
spoken about it but I was thinking it's
so loud now it's coming all the way out
in the hallway when she opened the door
I notice the radio was off oh and so I
said listen I was hearing a beeping
sound from that I was hearing on the
radio but I was hearing it out in the
hallway the radio was off she said the
other guys got a hearing aid in his ear
and they've got those bulky things under
their coats and so so I went in there
and I said I'm gonna try to find out
what's in there because they found me
now and she said well I'll follow them
and so they went down the steps and she
was after them but they forgot that it's
on the middle level like on the third
floor level or so because this building
is built on the bank going down to the
Seine and it doesn't have a street in
front of it it has this passage it's a
walkway that goes now and so they went
all the way all the way to the bottom
where the garbage cans are kept for
everybody in the building and there's a
door there but you have to have a key to
get in or out of that door and they were
trying the door and trying they couldn't
she told me that when she came back up
she went over and fiddled around with
some garbage cans and just watch them
and they whispered some things and they
went back up and out and disappeared she
came back to him his story and then I
started fooling around with his
typewriter and I I thought damn I fell
for it and I turned on the radio and you
could get this signal at several
frequencies but there was one that was
really loud or strong and so I began to
turn the I thought that they had DFT's
some kind of transmitter you know that's
how they actually find that's right and
that's how they could find the box which
is where they found me and so I began to
turn the typewriter round slowly like
this and depending upon the axis of the
of the box that held the typewriter the
signal was louder or softer so I knew
there was a directional
as murder in there and I had to find it
I thought first it might be in the
roller or wherever but then I started
checking the inside of the roof of the
box and I pulled off the the upholstery
and there before my eyes was this most
amazing thing it was a transmitter
homemade transmitter all these
transistors and batteries and antennas
and things all in notches carved out of
a very thin piece of plywood there
wasn't even a half maybe quarter inch
plywood or something and it was an
amazing sight to see and I of course
realized and then I had to get rid of a
lot of papers the next day and I I went
out on the Seine and there was a little
beach there where I took a whole
suitcase full of papers to make a
bonfire because it was too much to tear
up and and all that so I made this
bonfire out there and I'm blazing and
everything and and it was just down the
river from the Eiffel Tower and you
could see it right over there and I one
time I looked up and there was this guy
with a camera with a handheld camera a
motion fishing camera and he was
supposedly filming the Eiffel Tower but
I think he was filming me during this
bonfire throw these papers and so I've
kind of freaked at that but anyway that
the the result was that I left her place
and I went over to mow Mont on the other
side of Paris and I change hotels for
the rest of the days I was there maybe
three four days because it takes one day
for those slips to catch up with the
police the registry registered slips
that you have to fill out in the hotels
in Paris and so I was changing hotels
staying one day ahead of the CIA and the
French police and then I took the boat
over to took straight up to Calais and
across to to Folkestone and on the boat
they were waiting for me the British
immigration and when I got up there they
said oh yes take seat over there mr. AGM
and we'll call you and so time went by
and I had all these tapes and I had all
the work that I'd done in Paris in a
year and before that Mexico and I I
thought what is going to happen and that
takes
very incriminating and I thought they
might just take him away from me
and so it was raining like hell on the
crossing it was quite rough and
everything but I went up in that rain on
the top deck
I throw the tapes all my tapes over
because I didn't want them caught or
anybody to see them so that was gone and
then they called me back to the desk and
said where he staying well I had this
old copy of Europe on five dollars a day
that everybody used that financed
European $100 a day I suppose but it was
right it was the cheapest places to live
and so I had chosen some better
breakfast by our guy square and near
near the stations st. Pancras and Kings
Cross and I gave him a wrong address
also taken but it was a little bit more
expensive than this cheapest place so I
lied to them and went on from the train
to this place and checked in this bed
and breakfast and this was the most
depressing area oh god it was awful
over Christmas of 1972 because it was
foggy and cold and rainy and they had
these yellow street lights in London in
the section of old red brick buildings
and ugly and it was a far cry from cafe
au lait and croissants in Paris every
morning but anyway I continued on the
book I got the money from Penguin Books
and that solved the problem then I just
went on and did the book and in the
meantime the day I left Paris to come to
London Torres was arrested and I learned
this on the telephone because I'd made
the telephone arrangements to speak with
Holland and Leslie after I got to lend
him because they were coming over I
talked to Sal and he said Oh everything
terrible has happened
you can't imagine they picked up the
resin they took her into the prefecture
and they talked to her all day about you
interrogating her wanting to know this
want to know that and Leslie got so
scared with this that she went down to
Madrid
I said why it de Madrid she got to come
over here she got the money he said well
I'm going down there to you're too hot
right now we've got to we got to all go
down to Spain and so then they he goes
down to join her then we're on the phone
all the time they are calling me now
because the British pay telephones could
be called from outside you know they
would ring her so we make plan and I go
there stand by the phone until it rang
in and so they went down to Malaga and
they did everything they
do to get me to go to to Spain and I of
course was on to I mean I knew even
though it had doubts before now I had
proof and so I wouldn't go but I said
send me the money and I'll go in an
indirect way so I don't have to go
through airport passport controls and
things like that I'll take train I'll
take buses things like that and they
wouldn't do it I said no I'll come I'll
come I was naturally going to just keep
the money wasn't gonna go by any means
to Spain at that time it was Franco
fascism I knew the CIA was thick as
thieves with the fascist security
services I knew that from my own
experience and so I wasn't gonna go but
in the meantime I got relief from
Penguin Books and that changed my whole
life I was able to go onto the book
Leslie disappeared and so went back to
Paris and they didn't come over and then
I wrote the book it came out and after
the book had come out maybe a year or so
afterwards I was in Geneva and I
happened to meet someone who said Oh
mister i'm ecuadorian you know and i've
read your book and it is fabulous
everybody in ecuador is up in arms about
it and we know all the names that were
in there and by the way i think i know
that Leslie Dunnigan that was working
against you in Paris this is years
afterwards you know is like from 72 to
76 or 77 776 Pro and I said what do you
mean he says well I think she's working
at the United Nations right now but she
uses a different name here she calls
herself Janet Strickland I said well how
do you know she's the same person well
my best friend is a Spanish guy who
worked for the UN here too
and his best friend is a Spanish guy and
she told her boyfriend who's a Spanish
guy that she was working to the CIA
against you and he told my friend and my
friend told me and I said well I wonder
if we can see her he said oh yeah I know
we're offices he was working for one UN
agency she was working for the ILO the
International Labor Organization and so
we drove over to the ILO building parked
in the basement i sat in the cafe while
he went up to see if she was in her
office and she was in the office he came
back down so I went up the elevator
ninth floor so walk down the hallway
around the corner and I look different
then because when I was in Paris and she
was working on this thing
I had very long hair I had a huge hot -
style mustache and you know I was pretty
creepy looking but by this time I cut my
hair and I was normal and so I just
walked down that hallway looked in very
carefully and walked on and it was it
was she and so I went on back down got
with him and then I was back in Paris
and I wrote up the story and I took it
to Renee Buckman an editor at noodle
observator which is the sort of Time
Newsweek of France guy I knew and he
said he loved the story and they wanted
to publish it and here the CIA person
was now working on another name in the
UN no less so he said what about
photographs I said me photographs I
don't have any photographs ever you can
get some photographs over maybe no no
you didn't hurt to get in you and she
together I said you mean a confrontation
I said yeah I've got two photographers
over there who are great people they
could do something marvelous we have
really good photograph I said Renee if
you'll pay my way over there and pay the
hotel I'll do it but I'll try to do it
so back to Geneva I go to see Danny
Janu who's the stock for a woman and her
friend Hans who also photographer
they're working together and so we make
our plan and the plan included going
down after after this thing in her
office if we could do it then we would
not go to the elevator but we thought
there'd be a fuss so we would go down we
would find the stairway and we knew
where it was and we would go down four
or five flights real fast and then go
over to the elevator and down and out
and you know we had the Cartman so we
got it all ready and the night before in
the hotel I practiced in my bathroom
mirror the most ferocious looks I could
put on my face because I want to scare
her really skills and you know what out
of her and so the next morning we got in
the car they had all their equipment
over to the ILO barn basement up the
elevator to her floor down the hallway
and around the corner and the door is
closed where it had been open for I said
oh my god she's not working today I
knocked on the door come in and so I
opened the door and walk
and start walking over to her desk which
was on the other side by the windows
Donny goes over here to this corner
Hans closes the door behind him and
stands in front of the door and I walk
over to her and I'm leaning over on her
dead that's like this and I'm saying
hello Leslie
using the old name you thought I'd never
find you I said well I found you and now
I'm gonna get you you could have gotten
me killed back then and now I'm gonna
get you and and she set out this time
Wilson green you can imagine she got up
she went over to the door and we had
this fabulous photo taken by Danny where
she's she's really big she was tall tall
maybe in those heels she was over six
feet and so she's grabbing him by the
arm to pull him away from the door and
she's screaming all the time she opens
the door and goes running down the
hallway screaming at the top of her
voice we hustle out to the stairwell
down down to the car and out back to the
studio got the photograph they came out
perfect oh great and so back on the
flight plane to Paris give it all to
Renee and coming out on Thursday about
four days later Thursday I go to the
newsstand buy the magazine where's the
story it's not in there and I call
Rennie I said Renee what the hell is
this and he said Oh Phil I'm so sorry
I'm so sorry
John Danielle has killed the story and
Jean Daniel was the chief editor he
happened to be the man that Kennedy had
sent to see Fidel in November of 63 and
he was about improving relations and he
was sitting in Fidel's office when Fidel
got the first word of Kennedy's
assassination and john-john Don Young
had told Rene well we're not in the
business of exposing CIA operations and
so it was dead and I didn't do anything
until more on the story until November
when my deportation crisis started in
Britain and this was brought on by Henry
Kissinger who secretary Secretary of
State then made this long trip over
there I mean this secret trip over there
and forced the British to take action
against me and started a whole series of
deportations but the Sun newspaper in
London I mean all the media descended on
me in Cambridge and the Sun wanted their
special angle you know they're the third
page nude at noon every day
the mass tabloid newspaper of self-full
million five million copies a day and so
they wanted some kind of sex angle and I
thought well I'll give you a story and
so I gave him the Lesley Janet's story
and darned if they didn't find Lesley
Dunnigan
they got their New York bureau on to it
and they found Lesley Dunnigan a motel
clerk in Georgia and she swore that she
never works the CIA never worked against
me had never even been to Europe and so
it was obviously a false lead the last
question was have you ever heard of a
Janet Strickland oh sure
she was my best friend we grew up in
Caracas together oh so she switched me
Jim Strickland apparently was a real
name and she took her friends died
entity and so then they found the family
they were in a enormous villa in Palm
Beach and Leslie janet was there it was
her parents place and her father turns
out to be the head of all the Exxon
operations in Latin America and the
photographer and the journalist go down
there and the father comes down and
threatens to punch the you know the
photographer and the guy he got a
picture and so the son then ran a
three-part series on this the spy who
gotta know what that headline was but it
was front-page stuff you know and that's
the story and I don't know where she is
now
Sal disappeared gosh
and the circle was I told you it was a
long story the circle is complete the
oil man's daughter was working for the
CIA
incredible in Co but in any case I have
right now a a lawsuit going in the
federal district court in Washington
under the Federal Tort Claims Act for
six million dollars because we found in
documentation that I received under the
foi a in a long-running lawsuit from
late 70s to early 80s that the CIA had
committed criminal actions against me
during that period in which I was in
contact with Sal and Leslie early 70s
and the documents are highly censored so
we didn't get the exact nature of this
but it happened that the CIA tried to
get a criminal indictment against me
when my first book first came out this
is early 75 and
he was the director and they had to back
down because the Justice Department who
which was getting the facts to take to
the grand jury told found discovered all
this Eagle illegal activity in the files
they told the CIA if we indict and
prosecute then AG is going to have
access to all this through criminal
discovery procedure they said no no I
can never see the light of day and five
times in the 70s starting in 75
including when George Bush was director
they tried to get an indictment against
me and five times they back down because
this was so sensitive and I think it's
going coming out now in my torts Claims
Act torts claim lawsuit that this was a
murder plot it was a plot to make me
disappear and that the fruits of the
spanish services were going to do the
job if they could get me to go to Spain
that is sahlan Lesley not that they knew
what was really going to happen their
job was to get me in Spain and then the
Spanish would take over and there was
nothing to them - you know did so
disappear somebody yeah goes period so
I'm hoping I'm hoping that we will get
the real all the facts out and and find
out what they're really we're planning
that's high running you're doing some
work now studying the for your new book
I think studying the development and the
history of the CIA OSS Nazis and
neo-nazis is that correct yes in a way
what I'm doing is two things I am
teaching a course at the University of
Hamburg entitled the CIA the Cold War
and right-wing extremism and the content
of those lectures in that course and
sources and so forth they are going to
be a book so that the lectures will be
chapters of a book and I'm I don't know
when I had that's finished I hope it's
uh I haven't finished next year but I'm
teaching the course in any case as I go
along because it's in development and
what I'm trying to do is write a
selected history of the Cold War in and
show how there is a continuity between
the fascist and Nazi movement of the 20s
and 30s and 40s the Mussolini Hitler in
various other countries with what's
happening in Western Europe
in the United States today because one
of the most phenomenal things that has
occurred and hasn't gotten all that much
publicity except with Oklahoma City it
is beginning to is the growth of the
extreme right in Europe and in the
United States that is Western Europe and
the United States and Canada over the
last 10 or 15 years it's to me it's
really alarming and it's due in part to
the fact that United States policy after
the war in Western Europe kept these
movements alive and they used the Nazis
and the SS and the war criminals to
continue the war against the Soviet
Union that is the United States she took
over the German war against the Soviet
Union and use these people to continue
it but not as open warfare with troops
and so forth it was an underground
warfare it was the Cold War and the CIA
was one of the most important if not the
most important instruments in the Cold
War in carrying on this struggle against
the Soviet Union and all of Eastern
Europe its allies and they were carrying
on an undeclared war for ten years
through military operations and what
happened was as the Red Army was
advancing to the West the people who had
collaborated with the Nazis during the
occupation of the Baltic areas of
Eastern Europe of Belarus of Ukraine and
parts of Russia where they found
fascists everywhere and they formed SS
battalions and it was really these local
people in the Baltics it wasn't the Nazi
SS or waffen-ss so much who massacred
more than a million Jews but it was the
local people who formed because there
were 500,000 non-germans organized into
roughen SS units and these were the ones
that hunted down all the comments they
can find all the social stake and find
all the trade units they can find and
especially all the Jews that they could
find and those huge massacres like Bobby
are those were carried out largely by
the local people who
were fascists before Germany ever
invaded matter of fact the Ukrainians
after the the Bolshevik Revolution they
formed an organization of exiles in
Paris
so did Russians this is the 20s and
these people are cultivated by the Nazis
and trained and there's a there was a
Ukrainian army on the front lines with
the German troops as from the oun as
they marched in in 1939 or 41 actually
when they they crossed the border but
these people retreated back with the
retreating Nazi troops and by war's end
you had something like seven million
displaced persons or refugees in these
camps all over mostly in West Germany
and the United States then began to
recruit and to organize from these camps
and the key figure there was Hitler's
chief of intelligence for the Eastern
Front Reinhard Galen and Galen came from
a Prussian family Russian military
tradition and he had made his life's
work of studying the Soviet Union and in
his organization which had the German
initials fh o that means foreign armies
east in german he had accumulated the
most marvelous records of any country in
the world i mean by far away on the
soviet union and he had been doing this
since the 1920s and he had risen very
fast he's only 43 years old when the war
ended he had a lifetime ahead of it and
so what does he do the last days of the
war he micro comes all the files he puts
a microfilm in steel drums and they load
them all on trucks and with his top
people they drive from their office
there their headquarters near Berlin all
the way down to the Alps in Bavaria and
they start trudging up or getting the
trucks up there and then carrying these
drums up into a meadow where they buried
them and they walk back back down the
mountains and they waited for the Clarks
army to come through I think it was
Clark and once they were in occupied
territory of the Americans they left
their hotel
or wherever they were staying I think
they're in a hotel and turn themselves
in and Gaylen he was a general he
presented himself as a general
surrendering to the Americans and he
said I have some interesting things to
tell you and he had his principal aides
of course with him and everything and
and his main chiefs of sections and all
that they had our plan
they laid low after the war ended before
ghen eyes later and so they took Galen
to Camp King which had they the german
name was do lug left and this is where
the Germans brought all the down pilots
and crews for interrogation it was just
north of Frankfort a big military
compound base well we took over that the
United States Army took over this base
and renamed at Camp King and there they
they debriefed
Galen on what he'd been doing what he
had and he made a proposition said I
want to continue my war against the
Soviets well the Soviets were after him
because he was a war criminal he was
responsible for interrogating or for the
interrogations of the millions of Soviet
prisoners of war in the different camps
in Germany and they died by the billions
but he was in charge of getting the
information out of them that they were
capable of giving and torture and you
know all that was going on and so that
Soviets were looking for him to try him
as a war criminal they asked the
Americans have you arrested Galen do you
know anything about him you can guess
the answer no we don't know a thing
we don't know I think so in order to
protect him they flew him to Washington
he turned himself in and early May of
1945 and by June or July he was in in
Washington at one of the military
installations in Washington State there
a year and the counterintelligence core
that this was before the CIA was
established set him up in business back
in Germany and it became known as the
org the Galen operation or beening
organization the Galen organization and
then he started recruiting all these
people including SS including war
criminals and so forth and they took
over an SS compound in
pulak a little town just south of munich
and that's where they started up and
then they also opened offices in
different places under commercial cover
and so forth and CIA took the whole
thing over in 47
but Galen was very he was the key figure
in recruiting these people from Eastern
Europe to go to the training camps to be
trained in military skills as saboteurs
and so forth and then they were sent
back into their home countries to foment
rebellion to to [ __ ] economic
development or recovery after the war
you know so there could be this big
contrast between eastern and western
Europe these things went on for ten
years and Galen was one of the principal
figures they of course we're never able
to to really take control of any of
these countries but the outbreak of
violence in Berlin in the early years of
early 50s of Poznan in Poland 53 I think
56 in Hungary did a lot of damage in the
East East Germany for example they were
often caught though and it happened that
one of the big operations in the late
40s and early 50s was to overthrow the
government of Albania and restore King
Zog as in power he was sitting in Egypt
waiting to go back to Tirana and this
operation was a strange failure because
they had all these teams organized and
they brought them in in maritime
operations on the sea they brought them
overland from Greece they dropped them
in from black overflights what were
known as black overflights in them and
one after another after another got
rolled up
sometimes they forces were there waiting
for it and they would they would double
the WT operators WT the wireless the
radio operator Hall and they would then
give them disinformation to send back
and of course they were they were
sending under duress and and there were
suspicions and so forth until finally
when Philby defected that kim Philby the
Soviet penetration of the British
intelligence service they knew what had
gone wrong because Philby was the
British officer on the British side for
this Albanian operation and so he was
telling the Soviets everything in
advance and they telling Albanians and
and so
there there are several different
examples if there's one in Poland also
known as wind wi n which were the polish
initials for the organization and this
was supposedly the remnants of the Home
Army the so-called Home Army that had
been under control of the London poles
during the war which the British and the
Americans wanted put in power there and
the Soviets refused and that was one of
the major factors that opened up the
Cold War but for years they were
dropping in gold bars gold coins weapons
of all sorts and ammunition stuff and
till finally one day on polish national
radio they came on the air and exposed
the whole thing and the way it all
started was that they had sent this
general to London to say what his forces
were back in Poland and they bought and
then they organized all this stuff
through this general who was really
working for the poles on the start so
there are lots of these cases and these
paramilitary operations were finally
ended they were responsible for the for
fomenting the uprisings in East Germany
in the early 1950s in the Poznan
uprising in Poland and then the
Hungarian Uprising in 1956 but they the
the radio broadcast to these people have
been ambiguous by that time you know
nineteen fifty on they had one radio
operation going to all the different
languages of the Soviet Union and they
had that was radio first radio
liberation but then they changed it
because they weren't going to liberate
anybody so they changed it to Radio
Liberty and then there was Radio Free
Europe which broadcast in the languages
of the other Eastern European countries
both were based in Munich and both were
hot houses for war criminals from those
countries because not only did these
these Nazi collaborators from the
various countries of Eastern Europe come
back and then let themselves be formed
into paramilitary gangs to go back but
also they flocked to these radio
stations because they had the languages
and they had the political background
and so forth so you had all these
fascist war criminals in the CIA funded
radio stations they were not known as
CIA funded at the time supposedly they
were private donations from the United
States and so forth but
anyway those paramilitary operations
ended after the Hungarian revolt of 1956
there was a special investigation
Eisenhower any they call them off but
the propaganda and the political
operations continued so in this book I'm
writing and in the course I'm teaching
I'm trying to show how these efforts to
to continue the war against the Soviet
Union
using the Nazis and fascists and so
forth war criminals how these provided a
continuity for the survival of these
movements which is today so manifest in
Eastern Europe and Western Europe and in
the United States although it's a
different situation over here causes
very large religious content to the
extreme right movement here and in
between to show how fascist
or fascist style governments were
installed in so many places around the
third world and of course it starts in
the Philippines and goes to Vietnam
continues through the whole American war
in Vietnam and all over Latin America
and even in Africa in Korea for example
with the partition of Korea in 1945 I'm
trying to show how there was no real
democratic principle behind this policy
it was pragmatic and without principle
really it was simply to make sure that
these governments were on our side
against the Soviets and that they
allowed our companies come in and
operate and and so forth and so on but
there are so many fascinating areas of
Greece for example is one of the more
fascinating places because there was a
very big resistance in Greece to the
Nazi occupation from about 1941 on and
the main resistance forces were there
was a coalition and the principle or the
strongest in the coalition were the
Communists in Greece and the Nazis
formed what they called security
battalions made of Greeks and these were
military units and they were their job
was to eliminate the resistance and so
it was Greek on Greek fighting all
through those years and then at the end
of the war the British invaded Greece
as the liberation forces the Greek
resistance forces they took over the
whole country they set up an entire
administration model of Greece and the
British invaded to put them down just
like the French invaded in Vietnam to
put down the the liberation forces there
and then they set up a provisional
government that brought the King back
and so forth and then the Greek Civil
War started because of all the
repression against the the liberation
forces this this civil war goes on from
47 to 49 and after it's over the CIA
establishes a national Greek
Intelligence Service known by the
initials k YP that's the Greek letters
for CIA they gave the same name and this
was formed with the officers from the
old security battalions the fascists
hunters of the liberation forces and
these are the same men who in 1967
overthrew the democratic government and
established a seven year reign of
military dictatorship with the
institutionalization of torture forced
exile of thousands of Greeks and so
forth Italy another very interesting
interesting case where even as the
United States and Britain were the
occupying powers in Italy after the war
they allowed the Mussolini fascists to
establish a new fascist party which and
it was fascism was illegal it was
outlawed after the war but still Giorgio
Alma Dante for example who had been
Mussolini's last minister of propaganda
and the so called sallow Republic which
is a puppet public puppet puppet
government run by the germans in north
of italy in the last months of the war
he established the italian social
movement or msi in 1946 right under the
noses and with the approval or
acceptance by the united states and
britain they could have stopped it but
that party
survived through the years and grew and
grew and grew until it came into
government last year and this is a party
which dates from the mussolini party i
mean it's a direct descendant and it's
run now by fini John Franco fini and
they are a neo fascist party they in
listen with the Berlusconi force Italia
and the Northern League the three
parties came to power last March and a
day or two or two after the elections
fini the leader of the neo-fascists now
in power says Mussolini was the most
outstanding statesman of the century so
you see that there is a continuity there
and it's thanks in large part to US
policies because we were the dominant
factor even though the British were
involved as junior partners the French
as junior partners and so forth and it's
it's just fascinating to see how these
movements developed and the the the
inspiration for the neo-nazi movement in
Germany in the 1990s are these old Nazi
war criminals like Autorama and
Kristofferson and there's a lot of names
of former SS people war criminals who
either were never punished or were
punished with a slap on the wrist and
who never changed their views they are
unrepentant old Nazis who are the
inspiration to the younger generation
today and these are the people who in
conjunction with the skinheads are
firebombing the homes of Turks of their
cultural clubs and and killing killing
dozens of people so it's a it's a really
kind of complex but quite fascinating
scene and that's why I'm so interested
in doing a book on it in fact it's well
along but your book going to include the
bringing over into the United States a
lot of these fascist Nazi emigres is
attended and setting up organizations in
conjunction with the Republican Party oh
yes in fact I didn't mention but the the
overthrow of the elected Bulgarian
government in 1990 was carried out on
behalf of the way work organization I
mentioned the free Congress foundation
that was carried out were led by laws
were passed or and laws were passed or
is a Hungarian who was a youth leader in
the most fanatical of the Hungarian Nazi
organizations it was called the Arrow
Cross and he was a convicted war
criminal he had to he was I think
sentenced to two years after the war it
was it was a hardly a sense because he
was responsible for rounding up
he was involved in the rounding up of
tens of thousands of Jews to send to the
extermination camps this is during the
40's before the end of the war while
while while hunger still had this Nazi
regime under Admiral horthy but now the
[ __ ] the regime has been rehabilitated
in Hungary but pasture is the man who
was one of the major leaders of the
Republican ethnic electoral
organizations and they went into the
communities where there were people from
Eastern Europe and their clubs and so
forth you know in the middle western
here and there and this this ethnic
nationalities organization the
Republican Party was was chock-a-block
with fascists and Nazis from that period
in Eastern Europe they brought them over
here but they brought them over here for
different reasons the Apollo moon
landing was engineered and organized and
made possible through Nazi war criminals
like Verner von Braun these people who
came over and ran the Apollo program in
fact ran they hold United States rocket
program from 45 on had run the the
underground factory for the v2 rockets
and there was a it was in an old salt
mine which had been dug out much larger
and there they created this underground
factory that was invulnerable to bombing
and along sided they established a work
camp called Dora it was a concentration
camp and over a period of about two
years I think the figure is around
thirty five or forty thousand people who
died as slave laborers to make the
factory and then to be the workers in
the factory and these men were
responsible for that and they were
bought by the United States over to this
to this country and put in the same work
here and Otto Rudolph for example was
one of the principals along with fond
Brown and they eventually deported him
back to Germany and he he had they'd all
become US citizens several died von
Braun
but Rudolph lived on slightly long
enough to be to be deported and here
ounces your citizenship in the US Consul
General in Hamburg where I live so you
had them coming back you had Project
Paperclip for example there was a mad
rush for the German technology because
it was so for so much further advanced
in the United States or Britain
paperclip was the code name for breed
code name was for yes they had these
teams of army people who knew just where
they were going to go and they know who
to look for and they've made this study
all through the war and so they had
targets here there and everywhere and
they were rushing to get these people
before the Soviets got them and so as a
mad scene at the end of the war in the
months afterwards because they were
grabbing these people and bringing them
back as fast as they can could and they
didn't care whether they were war
criminals or whatever they did they gave
them new names in certain cases were the
worst cases and they protected them they
they violated violated US law right and
left bringing these people back but that
was that was the day I mean that was the
scene then and you know it it's no
different from today who follows the law
today in these things up yeah and so
that is why it's so important for people
to be involved in groups the group of
choice and there are many activities out
there to be engaged in such as
solidarity with Cuba to try to break
down that blockade of 35 years or with
Guatemala so there is something out
there for everyone and we only have
ourselves to blame if we don't take
action now because with the huge growth
of the extreme right in the United
States now with the militia movement and
the Christian patriot movement the hope
of paramilitary culture these are the
potential Brownshirts
of the future in my opinion and the same
exists in Europe where the electoral
parties are doing very well
in France and in Austria and Italy and
in Belgium and in Norway but here in the
United States they're these extremist
parties are not but the Christian Right
which is extremist in my opinion and
they want to impose their own concept of
morality on all the rest of us or civil
laws often you know you know that they
have taken over the control of the state
Republican Party apparatus in between 20
and 30 states and they are determined
they've they said it just straight up
front we are going to take control of
the Republic
party by the year 2000 this is pat
robertson's group but there are many
others who are even worse than that the
country is peppered with these extremely
extremist organizations and all they're
lacking really is a charismatic leader
and there's one out there in sure so
we'll only have ourselves to blame if
one day there's knock on the door and
they're coming for us because we didn't
take the opportunity when it was there
to make sure they never could do that
and that brings us to the end of this
alternative views frequently hear from
viewers who request a list of news
publications which we use on alternative
views and also a reading list for a u.s.
power structure in the mass media if you
would like to have these send a stamped
self-addressed envelope to the
alternative Information Network p.o box
Austin Texas seven eight seven one three
you must send a self-addressed stamped
envelope we would like to acknowledge
the assistance of the people that helped
us make our program possible Jamie Otis
is making a documentary about the CIA
this film features Phil Agee in it and
Jamie's one who was the facilitator for
getting us our interview with Phil Agee
the Texas student television group
provided the facilities and the crew we
really appreciate the help of our
director Steve Kahn he was assisted by
the technical director Marty Harris the
camera people were Tony Rumore
Sabrina to Bo and Tommie Kaiser we also
appreciate the help of Don Cooper who
was the escort for Philip Agee
alternative views as a production of the
alternative Information Network peel Box
7279 Austin Texas seven eight seven one
three so that's our address if you'd
like to write to us goodbye
you